@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the G-Wrap Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C)  2014 David Pirotte
@c See the file g-wrap.texi for copying conditions.

@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

This manual describes how to use G-Wrap.  It relates particularly to
G-Wrap version @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Contributors::
* G-Wrap License::
@end menu

@node Contributors
@unnumberedsec Contributors to this Manual

The contributors to the G-Wrap manual are:

@itemize @bullet
@item Christopher Lee <chrislee@@ri.cmu.edu>
@item Rob Browning <rlb@@defaultvalue.org>
@item Andreas Rottmann <rotty@@debian.org>
@item Ludovic Courtès <ludovic.courtes@@laas.fr>
@item David Pirotte <david@@altosw.be>
@end itemize

If you find any problems in this manual, please report a bug.  See
@xref{Reporting Bugs}, for more information on how to report a bug.

@node G-Wrap License
@unnumberedsec The G-Wrap License
@cindex copying
@cindex GPL
@cindex LGPL
@cindex license

G-Wrap is Free Software.  G-Wrap is copyrighted, not public domain, and
there are restrictions on its distribution or redistribution, but
these restrictions are designed to permit everything a cooperating
person would want to do.

@itemize @bullet
@item
G-Wrap and supporting files are published under the terms of the GNU
Lesser General Public License version 2 or later.  See the file
@file{COPYING.LIB}.

@item
The manual you're now reading is published under the terms of the GNU
Free Documentation License (@pxref{GNU Free Documentation License}).
@end itemize

You must be aware there is no warranty whatsoever for G-Wrap.  This is
described in full in the licenses.


@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "g-wrap.texi"
@c ispell-local-dictionary: "american"
@c End:
