@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the G-Wrap Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C)  2014 David Pirotte
@c See the file g-wrap.texi for copying conditions.


@node Reporting Bugs
@section Reporting Bugs

Any problems with the installation should be reported to
@email{bug-guile@@gnu.org}.

If you find a bug in G-Wrap, please report it to the Guile developers,
so they can fix it.  When you write a bug report, please make sure to
include as much of the information described below in the report.  If
you can't figure out some of the items, it is not a problem, but the
more information we get, the more likely we can diagnose and fix the
bug.

@itemize @bullet

@item
The version number of G-Wrap.  This manual documents G-Wrap version
@value{VERSION}.

@item
The version number of Guile. You can get this information from invoking
@samp{guile --version} at your shell, or calling @code{(version)} from
within Guile.

@item
A complete description of how to reproduce the bug.

If you have a Scheme program that produces the bug, please include it
in the bug report. If your program is too big to include. please try
to reduce your code to a minimal test case.

@item
A description of the incorrect behavior.  For example, "The Guile
process gets a fatal signal," or, "The resulting output is as follows,
which I think is wrong."

If the manifestation of the bug is a Guile error message, it is
important to report the precise text of the error message, and a
backtrace showing how the Scheme program arrived at the error. This
can be done using the @code{,backtrace} command in Guile's debugger.
@end itemize

If your bug causes Guile to crash, additional information from a
low-level debugger such as GDB might be helpful. If you have built
Guile yourself, you can run Guile under GDB via the
@code{meta/gdb-uninstalled-guile} script. Instead of invoking Guile as
usual, invoke the wrapper script, type @code{run} to start the
process, then @code{backtrace} when the crash comes. Include that
backtrace in your report.


@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "g-wrap.texi"
@c ispell-local-dictionary: "american"
@c End:
